I came out of this program in 71. I think many of us
did that were more generalist. I think there's
some positives and negatives on that. I think many
times you're so general that people don't think
you can really do functional planning. My whole
life has been saying if you know how to plan, you can
plan for anything, no matter what. And you can do
comprehensive planning. You can deal with
strategic planning issues. You can deal with
functional issues. And you can become an expert in
health planning. I don't know where the future is
in this whole business. I'm just around so many
people that planning is so foreign that you have to
sell your wares for other things. You have to sell
on, you know, like I'm in policy development.
Every action that I get the governor to act upon
It's a little planning document. I gather facts. I
do the analytical work necessary to sift those
out, determine what the real facts are, so to
speak, and develop kind of an issues development,
and then try to lay out the options and say,
Governor, this is what you ought to do. So that's
what I'm doing. Never is it called planning. But
that's what we're involved in.
What about state? Does state planning have any
appeal to you at all? State level stuff? None? Not
at all yet. I think they're interested in private
sector. Well, we haven't known anybody to talk to
us about state planning. We don't know anything
about state planning. It's very seldom discussed
in the department. understanding regional
planning is really not discussed anymore. It's
kind of funny that regional planning, again, I've
worked with it off and on for my whole career. Bye
bye. I'm sorry you're leaving. Take care.
I'm really sold on regional planning. And I guess I
am because I just know there's so many issues that
can't be dealt with at the state level, so many
issues that can't be dealt with the city level. And
our counties are just, you know, if you had
counties like California, then you don't need
regional planning, probably. You have highly
capable, strong planning and program staff
within the county level. And so, you know, the
necessity for regional planning probably is
maybe less. I don't know. But in Texas, we have
nothing at the county level, fairly strong
activities going on, particularly urban cities,
big cities. But in rural towns, no program staff.
And then the state level is really weak on planning
and issue development. So regional planning is a
real good function to try to pull together city,
county issues and be a link between the state of
Texas. Leon, what do you think the chances are of
having a new state planning law written or a state
planning law written that would mandate certain
actions by the state? I think it's interesting.
Let me mention, I don't know how to tell you, but
look at the second actual page on that task force.
The second page, if you look at the front of the
document and just look at the actual last
LegalLink page. The last one on that page is
Special Committee on Organization of State
Agencies. Here. Too bad they didn't number the
pages. Thank
you. Let me just bring this to your attention,
because we're looking at how we could opt to
restructure state government with this with this
group. My director is on this, this group and the
governor appointed the chairman. So we're gonna
try to influence this this group, although their
appointees from lieutenant governor and speaker
on
this whole issue of how we reorganize. We got into
this whole discussion of super agencies, trying
to instead of having 300 and some odd state
agencies, try to have 18 super agencies with
breakouts, maybe departments, maybe an
environmental agency with air, water, whatnot
under it, rather than having the independent
little small agencies. A
number of people have testified that many states
have gone away from the umbrella type agency
because of numerous problems. The umbrella
agency concept was supposed to be big in the late
70s. There are a number of states that did
reorganization of state government and did the
umbrella agency concept. In fact, Jimmy Cotta
which was one of the earlier ones that reorganized
Georgia and
did that lumping of agencies. But we've had a
number of people testify that rather than that, we
needed to really emphasize the governor forming
these
planning commissions of agency heads, which the
governor can do now. But, I mean, they're saying
mandate it. They're saying mandate reports at a
certain time, mandate action, which is really the
only way you'd probably appropriate dollars for
it and so forth. And what I'm saying is that would
exactly be, I don't know that you'd call it a
planning agency particularly, but it would be...
You know, time might be right for a piece of
legislation that would require these kinds of
planning functions.
Well, usually in an era of trouble, economic
trouble, people are searching for answers of some
type.
So what you could do is work with your students and
come up with a strategy and over there at the
appropriate time. Exactly. Since they're all
interested in city government, they don't care
about mending state government? Well, if we were,
if Texas A&M were in Austin, I think that we'd have
something of a different orientation towards
state government in this department. I don't
think so. We really don't get over there that
often. You see, the planning department in the
University of Texas doesn't see any... We don't
see them. That's them.
They're different. They've always been
different. Yes, ma'am. I think that the reason I'm
not interested as much in it as a career, I'm
interested
in it as a career. I want to work more with the
teachers. at the state level, because that means
you don't feel like you're really working with
people, you feel like you're working with a whole
regional plan. It's very necessary. I just wonder
if you don't think you're attacking that, but it's
just, I want to work more with the grassroots and
the people. Where the action is. Yeah, I want to see
results, and I don't think that you will
eventually, but I think it's slower moving at that
level, because it hasn't been tested, and that's
why we're in trouble. Maintain good health so you
live long enough to see the results of your work.
I'll try. You can try. With the size of
your staff, what is the background of people
coming in from public administration? Or are they
trained planners? I was the first planner that had
a degree in it, hired in the governor's office.
Ralph, you know, is an example. I
think it's a mixed bag now and now with budget
planning being merged and heavy on the budget.
Most of their focus is like LBJ directors, the
public administration.
You know, but I think state government in general,
they're different planning shops there. But I'm
not trying to sell you. I would say that any job that
you have, you need to understand about the state
level, how to deal with them, how to manipulate
them or whatnot. I would probably counter a little
bit. I think we probably see quite a few people,
bodies in our office wanting issues to be dealt
with similar to a city planning office. I will say
this. Y'all may not see this a lot, but we have
public broadcasting on our table, the network,
and there's a lot of city stuff, you know, played
late at night. And particularly at the county
level, every decision that's made is made open to
the world. Every decision that's made. I saw the
other night a consultant being selected, and the
consultants were drug out before the commission
in the county commission and they testified
before the commission and body of people in the
background and everybody watching on TV and they
were saying why why don't you think we all select
you you know what's wrong with those guys next to
you I mean it was a much more open process than state
government And I don't know, I guess it's better,
but gee, that's something that's not done at that
state level. I mean, you would have consultants in
independently to discuss their piece and then
excuse them and get the next guy in, you know, that
kind of thing, rather than having them right there
before the world. Leon, looking at this map of the
Texas planning regions, which are distributed
The quality of performance by the various cogs in
the state is very uneven. We have one locally that 4
o'clock y'all have to be by. I enjoyed coming. And
don't give up on the state, OK? Yeah, see you. If
y'all need to run, don't feel compelled to stay. It
was good to be here with you. Yes. The quality of the
work of the local COG is non-planning, shall we
say. What can be done about a job description in
terms of sort of a possible mandating of certain
levels of planning by the various COGs around the
state? Is there any hope for that sort of thing to
happen that would give them a mission? Well, it's
real difficult to, even when we were funding them
very extensively, it's difficult to mandate. The
whole philosophy of regional councils were that
they were to provide local elected officials come
together and form entities. Obviously, there are
certain things they have to do in order to get their
federal and state funds. But they are locally
operated and owned, and there's always a point
where the elected officials say, we ain't doing
that. And there's always that fine line. I think
the answer would be, yes, there ought to be more
specific criteria given them. The money is being
cut back. State level money is being cut back. Now
we're in a reduction mode rather than increasing
mode, even with costs rising.
Our ability to really mandate those things might
be limited by the fact that we just don't give them
that much money. But the unevenness all comes from
the fact that the money, like the smaller cogs will
get like $50,000 from the state. And be a planning
director and get $50,000 and say, you just go out
and do all the planning you want to do for $50,000.
Of course, they job around and get their other
federal and state dollars to try to keep the doors
open. But they don't have the discretionary money
to do. I mean, they've got to run the aging program,
and they've got to run the job training program,
and they've got to do the criminal justice stuff
where they're distributing funds for crime
fighting. This is my complaint about them is that
they're doing service-oriented programs.
They're not doing planning. It's a service
operation now. That is where they've had to go. The
701 HUD money was the glue money, as well as the
state dollars. And then there were several other
generalist pots of money, and those are gone.
Another question I keep asking, why is it that
Oregon, Florida, and California can get away with
mandating planning, statewide planning, when,
for example, Oregon is hardly a wealthy state. But
they require it of every county and every city in
the state. And they've all done it.
I would probably say if you look at the revenue
stream for those cities and counties, you will
find that all those dollars come from the state.
Whereas our city and county governments operate
off of... ad valorem taxes. So their money, I mean,
they're allowed to do the ad valorem taxes by the
state of Texas, but they don't have to ask for the
money. The money is theirs because they provide
that taxation. I don't know that that is totally
the case, but I think that Oregonians, in this
case, do try to exercise a great deal of equity. so
that if state government does mandate something,
I think that state government feels a
responsibility for funding the opportunity to
fulfill the mandate. Yeah, that's probably true.
I think, I was just thinking about New Mexico. All
the revenue is brought up to the state level, and
then they spew it back to the cities and counties
based on, you know, a funding, you know, deal. And
they, you know, I don't know exactly how they
distribute it, but that, you know, it makes a lot of
difference. They will give you these tax dollars
if you will do these things. And I guess, for the
record or anybody else, city and county
government associations, that's a major
complaint with them, that state government tends
to lay mandates on city and county and other
entities without the appropriate resources to
get it done. And to some extent, that's true in
state government. Of course, the feds have done
that, too. Oh, sure. It trickles down through the
beds. I had
a quick question for you, and I guess a statement
coming back to one of your questions and the
interest of why people aren't interested in
estate planning. In my situation, I'm interested
in urban design, and does the state at any level
offer that? to a planter coming out of school,
urban design. What do you mean by that? Well, do
they use... I mean, what... I know the city uses,
like, an urban designer, but... When you say urban
design, what do you mean? What kind of thing would
you envision designing? More or less like a dart
and so on, train stations,
cityscape and so on. Well, that's obviously going
to have to be a city. Yeah, that's obviously going
to have to be a city. But when you said urban design,
the transportation planning function within the
highway department, for example, has a heck of a
lot to do with what goes on within a city, a city of
Houston or Dallas or whatever else, although a lot
of that's done locally. But the freeway systems
and all that kind of stuff has a lot to do with that.
But I think, yeah, I think your urban design is
primarily done by the urban areas, urban cities.
And in my case, I didn't think the state would have
that. No, I think your interest, you'd be better
served in the larger urban areas. It's kind of
interesting because I'm, you know, quite
frankly, I'm not sure just how much... urban
design is done within Dallas and Houston and San
Antonio. Well, I'm not either. I was going to
mention that during the break between semesters I
spent in Switzerland. And there you have a country
that just reeks of urban design. And it's all
consistent within the entire country. The
bridges are all, they're just pure works of art.
And they use minimal materials. and a maximum of
thoughtful engineering design, rather than the
reverse that we do in this country. And all the
signing and so forth is very carefully studied.
And the placement of outdoor advertising, they
have a lot of it. But it's done in a way that it's not
visually disruptive. And it can be done. I don't
think that simply because it's a state that it is
impossible, even a large state like Texas,
because there we're dealing with a whole country
composed of, in their case, cantons. They have a
central planning agency for the federal
government. They do, out of Barron. And all things
are planned out of that office? And they have a
national plan.
They put all of their resources in those kinds of
things rather than military spending? They put a
lot of money into military spending. That's the
reason that they stayed neutral during the Second
World War. Every... They don't spend that many
dollars in their... Percentage-wise, it's very
high. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. In all of those
mountains, you have artillery, and they're
pointed in all sorts of directions, namely in
Germany. Oh. Yeah. And they come up hydraulically
out of the ground. They look like farmers... hay,
drying, pots, and so forth. But it's all
camouflage. In the Department of Commerce
packet, it talks about how the commission should
look at, or how they should look at other states'
plans. Is that something that is done a lot? Is it
keeping up with what other states are up to? It's
kind of interesting. On this consolidation task
force, Yes, the Consolidation Task Force.
Every agency, they call the agencies in. Every
agency is telling them what they do and so forth. It
seemed like the question always got around, well,
how do other states do what you bid? And it's kind of
funny that it's gotten where now. That's the first
question asked. How do you compare? How do we rank
with other states? How do we, you know... And we
always rank low in terms of state spending per
capita or whatnot. That's a fairly new attitude in
state government. Oh, it is. Most of the time, we
were proud of underspending. And still, I'm not
sure we're away from that. Well, the point I'm
making, too, is that it was almost forbidden to
mention experience gained from other states
texas had its own way of doing things and you could
not compare with other states because they all did
it wrong well they all did it wrong for texas i'm
sorry yes yeah well you met uh in the strategic
economic policy commission the mission one of the
mission is to lead the development of a
comprehensive plan for the state which will
provide both long-term direction and placing
priority on other short-term actions to improve
the state's economy. Considering the, what,
because this was established in 19, I don't know
when it was. Well, the regions were actually
delineated in 68, the study was done, yeah. But
considering the 1968 delineation, we have about
24 regions. How do you reconcile the objectives or
goals of these 24 different counties into one
state objective?
Well, I'm not sure what the strategy is going to be
of the commission. I know the COGS, the regional
councils, we call them COGS sometimes, regional
councils are offering to feed in to this
commission. They've already met a couple of
times, and they're offering to provide forums at
the 24 regional levels. provide free space and all
this kind of stuff to to help you know with this
input into the to the plan I'm sure they'll
probably play a role I'm not sure how much quite
frankly Commerce if it has a weakness right now is
recording it has a weakness right now it's heavily
weighted toward businessmen and it doesn't
really have much of a governmental slant. So I'm
not sure how that will all play out. But all the
government appointees are
businessmen-oriented, focused. So I'm not real
sure how comfortable the department's going to be
working with regional entities. But I think you
make a good point. I think the reasons certainly
would be, even though, as Bob says, they're
probably not particularly good are doing much
planning now. They're probably as good as most
folks out there that are doing planning. You start
looking at other governmental entities. I could
be proven wrong within some of the major urban
areas, but you go to Podunk, a little town, and
they're zoning. They throw in zoning ordinances
and stuff, but there's really not much planning
involved. But I appreciate your comment or your
question. We're going to be encouraging that from
our office. We're going to be encouraging the use
of regional council in that process. I would
certainly like to see a job description at least
suggested by state government for COGS in terms of
what would be nice to see them do in terms of
planning? It could start out being suggested. You
don't see their law. You see their law lately? The
law has some pretty heavy statements about what
they should do. If you'll get the last directory,
look at the back at the Article 1011M, I would be
surprised if you wouldn't think that sounds
pretty, pretty good. But someone's going to have
to say, you see the law? Do it. and here's some money
that you can get it done with. It sounds pretty
comprehensive planning-oriented, involving
all the functional planning components and so
forth. I'll have to take a look. You might look at
it. Thank you all. Appreciate it. Thank you very
much, Leon. Yes. Thank you.